Now with that theory part out of the way, now that we know that there at least is some difference between
server side and client side routing,
let's actually go back to the client side and make our posts editable.
Now right now, I can of course still create new posts like here,
new post, this is a new post like that
and if I save that, I can go back to my messages and here we got new post, now
clicking edit doesn't do anything though,
now we want to change that. When we click edit,
I simply want to go back to the new post page
but of course it shouldn't be the new post page, it
should just be, well the same form
I see there I'd say. So I'll
will first of all create a new route for that, that new route with also load the post create component
but I will access it through edit and then I need to know which post to edit
and that should be information that's encoded
in the url,
so I will add a dynamic segment to that path.
So edit is one part of the path but then I'll have another part separated by a slash which is dynamic
and that is indicated to the angular router by adding a colon and then you can name this however you
want,
like for example post ID.
You'll later be able to extract that dynamic information by that parameter but you'll see how that works
in a second.
So now we're loading the post create component for this path too
but actually we'll then do something different.
Now the post create component is of course this component which holds our form and we can actually
reuse that form,
that will probably be all right but we have to make sure that when we hit save post and therefore when
we submit this and call on add post, that we actually differentiate between are we adding a new post or
editing an existing one
but step by step we now know that the post create component will be loaded for two different paths and
we will need to make sure that we actually handle these different cases.
Thankfully the angular router gives us a little help with that, we can inject something into the component
which is loaded through the router which helps us identify some route information, like for example the exact
path through which this route was loaded
and this will become important because we will know that when we can extract the posts ID, that we are
in edit mode whilst in the other case that we can't extract this,
we are in the create mode.
So in the post create component, I'll inject something and I'll bind it to a public property and the
injected
thing is the active route, excuse me, the activated route, the activated route which is
imported from @angular/router.
So this router package gives us this activated route object and this hold some important information
about the route we're currently on.
Now I want to use that information when the component is created and it's a good practice to not do this
in the constructor, to basically keep the constructor lean but to instead use ngOnInit.
So I will implement onInIt here,
make sure to also import that from @angular/core and therefore I'll then add my ngOnInit method
and in here, we can now try to find out whether we have a post ID parameter or not.
We can extract this by accessing this route, so our injected activated route and there we have
the param map object or property.
Now the param map is actually a subscription, an observable excuse me,
it's an observable to which we can subscribe
and as for all built-in observables, we never need to unsubscribe
by the way. Now it is an observable because the parameter in the url could change whilst we're on the page because
we could have some link which we can click to essentially load the same angular component but for a
different post ID let's say, so only the ID in the url would change, the component is the same
but obviously the data we display on that component would need to change too and that is why we get
this observable.
With that, we can listen to changes in the route url or in the parameters to be precise and we can
therefore react to that and update our UI
but angular avoids the unnecessary re-rendering of the entire component which is, well
which really doesn't make a lot of sense because it's still the same component,
we just need to know about the change.
So in that subscription here, we get a so-called param map object in our first callback here,
so this will be executed whenever the parameters change.
There we get our param map which is of type
param map
and now we can look into that param map and see if a certain parameter exists. So we can check if param
map has the post ID parameter.
Now why post ID? Because that is the identifier we defined in our app routing file, here
post ID, this one. Because we have that name here,
we have to look for that name here. If we have that post ID,
we can try extracting it and using it and if we don't have it, well then we know we are in create mode
so we should probably store that information.
I'll add a private property here and I'll name this mode and the mode by default let's say is create.
Now we could set this here in our if check, there we could set mode equal to edit because if we have
a post ID, then we are in edit mode and otherwise
else we can set it to create,
of course you could also use a number or an enum to control this.
Now with that, we also need to extract that post ID,
so I will add another property here, post ID which will be of type string and initially it's undefined.
Here however in the edit mode, I can set this post ID equal to param map get post ID and this will be
a string. Now in the create mode, I'll set it to null again because here we have no post ID to edit,
we are in create mode after all.
So now we have that extra information,
now what else do we need to do?
Well we probably want to fetch the information about the post we're editing when we are editing it
and we can get it from our post service of course,
we could also get it from our backend though.
It depends,
do we want to get it from the post service where we of course only have the latest snapshot or do we
want to have a brand new version of it from our server?
Now we can go either way but here theoretically we have no way of fetching an old version
if we take it from the post service so I will go with that approach right now.
So therefore, we just need to be able to fetch a single post from our list of posts here
and for that I'll add a new method to the posts service get post and there I'll expect to get the ID,
which is a string of the post I want to fetch and then I simply return a new object here because
I want to create a clone of the object I'm returning and I'll use the spread operator for this to pull
out all the properties of an object and add them to a new object so that we again don't accidentally
manipulate the original object
in the array
and now I will just fetch that object from the post array in the posts service with the help of the
find method.
There, a function will be executed on every post in the array
and if it returns true, then this is the post object it will return.
So here I want to check if the post we're looking at,
if that ID is equal to the ID we're passing as an argument here.
So such a post would then be returned, then we would pull out all the properties and we would add them
to a new javascript object and that object is then returned.
So now we have get post, in post create in that component, we already inject the post service,
so now here we can just load that post and we probably want to store that too,
so here we can add a new private property post which will be of type post,
we will need to import that posts type from our post model, so make sure to add this import path and
with that added, we can go down and here, say this post is equal to this posts service get post and pass
on the post ID we just extracted from our
url
And now we're taking that post, we're storing it,
now the only thing that's left to do is that we actually fill our form with that post data and then
handle the submission.
Now in order to see if that works, we just need to make sure that we can actually load this page and
for that, I'll go to my post list component
and here we have that edit button.
Now that should actually not be a button but instead it should be an anchor tag and it should have a
link,
so with the help of router link again, which actually leads to /edit and then our dynamic parameter,
so the ID of the post.
Now for that we'll use a different syntax, we'll bind to a property of router link which is also
called router link so we just wrap that with square brackets
and now we don't pass a string here but we pass square brackets as a value where we describe the individual
segments of the path we want to load
and these segments are now strings.
The first one is /edit because in the app routing configuration, we have /edit as a first
segment but the next segment after the slash is actually post ID.
So there in our posts list,
I will add a comma, a new element and simply pass post.id referring to the post we're looping through
and then accessing the ID there.